# A small update
This post is a small reminder that I still exist and occasionally do stuff.
Particularly, I've resumed the development of
[gabelstaplerwm](https://github.com/ibabushkin/gabelstaplerwm) after a small
break. A lot of (breaking) and maybe even exciting changes are taking place
right now, as I am in the process of adding new features while fixing bugs and
addressing architectural issues at the same time. All in all, I am quite
content that the project will reach a stable state in the next few months,
depending on my time. Then, I can focus on cleaning up the code, providing a
nice default config, documenting everything and getting the first usable
version released.

However, other things have been done as well - I started writing a simple
`weechat` plugin to integrate it with `telegram-cli`, and wasted a lot of my
time on other, not really useful things as well.

Sadly, I didn't make much progress on the decompilation implementation in
Haskell - I generally didn't do much Haskell lately, which is pretty sad,
considering my love for the language and it's ecosystem. However, I couldn't
find an appropriate project for it that I could hack on, which left me in the
current situation. However, since I (non-deliberately) paused my
Haskell-development I noticed I started using a more functional programming
style in Rust.  That's a good turn, because it signals improved understanding
of the language, but still has it's aesthetic flaws - I don't think my Rust
code is particularly beautiful. More practise should fix this as well I hope.

Next post will be on more project ideas (if I get some), maybe describe some
progress in the things mentioned here. I also plan to write short (weekly?)
posts with small discussions of interesting things I've found.
